---
title: Project 1 Prelim
nav_order: 1
parent: Projects
summary: P1 Prelim
---

# Lab 1: Preliminaries for Project 1

**Due Date: Friday, 1/19/2021 11:59PM CST**

## Overview
This project is meant to get you started working with the 6502, especially
with writing high-level (C) code for it and writing 6502 assembly. Having
this understanding will help when you're building and debugging your own
6502 emulator. Before you get started with the project, you will want to
familiarize yourself with the 6502 instruction set, e.g. by looking
[here](http://6502.org/users/obelisk/6502/instructions.html). You can get used to
writing and assembling 6502 programs
[here](http://skilldrick.github.io/easy6502/#first-program). There are
plenty of other references and tutorials elsewhere online.

## Part 1: Getting Started


On a Linux system of your choosing (e.g. a Linux VM), first download the
cc65 toolchain. This is a set of cross-compiler tools for compiling from
C to 6502 ASM targeting various platforms. It also includes a 6502
simulator, which we'll be using for this project (since we don't have our
own emulator yet!). First, get the codebase by running the following:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/cc65/cc65.git
cd cc65
make
```

If you have admin access on your system (recommended, use a VM if you must),
you can make it such that the binaries are globally available by running the
following:

```
sudo make avail
```

Now let's build a simple Hello World program that we can run on the provided
6502 simulator. Note that for this example I'm assuming that you are in the
`cc65` directory.

```
cat test.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <conio.h>
int main () { printf("Hello World\n"); }
```

We then need to cross-compile this code for the 6502. Note that when we say
cross-compile, we mean that we're compiling on one platform for another
platform. We typically use cross compilers when building OSes or programs for
embedded systems or systems which are not capable of hosting their own
compiler.

First, we compile from C to 6502 assembly:

```
cc65 -t sim6502 -o test.s test.c
```

This invokes the 6502 C compiler, and we tell it with the `-t` flag that we're
compiling for the simulator platform. Note that `cc65` also has other targets
like the NES and Commodore 64. The result is that we have a file containing the
6502 assembly language for our Hello World program (`test.s`), which we must
now assemble into an object file that can be linked:

```
ca65 test.s
```

This invokes the 6502 assembler, which assembles the program and produces an
object file named `test.o`, which we can now link:

```
ld65 -t sim6502 -o test test.o lib/sim6502.lib
```

Notice here that when we invoke the 6502 linker, we again specify the
target simulator platform, but we also link with a library. This is
a pre-built library included in cc65 which gives us most of the C standard
library (e.g. `printf`) for the simulated platform. The result
is that we now have a binary executable for the simulator that we can now
run:

```
sim65 test
Hello World
```

We can save some time by invoking cc65's compiler wrapper, which will do
the above three steps for us (compile, assemble, and link):

```
cl65 -t sim6502 test.c
sim65 test
Hello World
```

## Part 2: Fibonacci

Your goal here is to write a program that calculates the nth Fibonacci number
and outputs the result to the simulator console. You will do this in two ways.
The first will purely be in C. So that we don't have to deal with input
devices, you should define N as a preprocessor macro, i.e.:

```
#define N 10
```

In your first implementation, you should only have one C file which contains
two functions, `main()` and `fib(int n)`.

For your second implementation, you will implement `fib` as a 6502
assembly routine in a separate file called `fib.s`. You will want to
make use of the `ca65` [User's Guide](http://www.cc65.org/doc/ca65.html), the [6502 ISA Reference](https://www.masswerk.at/6502/6502_instruction_set.html)
, and perhaps some [code samples](https://github.com/cc65/wiki/wiki/Applications-written-in-assembler-with-ca65) to write your program.

When you're done, you should have two files, `fib.s`,
`main.c`. You can produce object files using `cc65` and `ca65` as above
and then link all the object files together (along with `sim6502.lib`) to produce
a binary that you can run on the 6502 simulator. Your program should print only
the result of the computation, e.g. if N is defined as 25:

```
sim65 fib
75025
```

Note that you perform output in C. Your assembly should only include
the implementation of `fib` (unless you really want to write it
all in assembly).

## Handin
There is no handin required for this project (but you must do it unless you want to be lost in the **real** project 1!)
