---
title: Project 1 
nav_order: 2
parent: Projects
summary: P1 
---

# Project 1: Hawknest 6502v Emulator

Released: Thursday, 01/18/2024
**Due Date: Friday, 02/09/2024 11:59PM CST**

## Overview
For this project, you will be completing the implementation of the Hawknest emulator. This emulator will be built around the 6502v processor, a version of the MOS 6502 CPU which I've modified slightly for our convenience. The v indicates that this CPU supports paravirtual extensions (namely, a new instruction).

The goals of this project are to:

- Give you experience working with a fairly large C source tree
- Help you understand how system emulation works
- Refresh your understanding of ISAs and the internal operation of CPUs
- Have fun!

Keep in mind that this project carries many of the imperfections of real-world code. If we encounter bugs or hiccups, we will work through them together.

## Part 1: Getting Started

The ideal way to start with this project is using a Vagrant VM. Much like
Docker for containers, this allows you to quickly provision virtual machines
based on pre-defined configuration files. I've set up one of these Vagrantfiles
for you so that you don't have to deal with the headache of different system
packages etc. First install [Vagrant](https://vagrantup.com/) on your machine as well as a provider, such
as [VirtualBox](https://virtualbox.org/) or [VMWare](https://www.vmware.com/products/workstation-pro.html) (paid).

Once you get Vagrant up and running, you will need to download the Hawknest
skeleton code. We will be working primarily with `git`, so make sure you are
familiar with the basics. To get the code, run the following in your machine:

```
git clone https://github.com/HExSA-Lab/hawknest-skeleton.git
cd hawknest-skeleton
```

This will fetch the handout code from our public git repo. Notice that in that
directory there is a Vagrantfile. To use it, just run:

```
vagrant up
```

If you're using the VirtualBox backend (which is probably the easiest), you will probably also have to
install the VirtualBox Guest plugins for Vagrant before running `vagrant up`. You can do so like this:

```
vagrant plugin install vagrant-vbguest
```

## Part 2: Building and Running Hawknest
This section will get you to the point where you can build and run the Hawknest
emulator.

### Prerequisites
You should not have to install any prerequisite packages if you are using
Vagrant. One thing to note however, is that the NES emulator mode of Hawknest
will only work if you boot up the Vagrant VM with a GUI (this should happen by
default, but we've seen issues with this before. Come see us if this is the
case).

### Building the Emulator
Once you have installed the prerequisites, you should be able to build the emulator as follows:

```
make
build/emu/gcc/debug/mos6502/vmcall.o <- emu/mos6502/vmcall.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/mos6502/mos6502-common.o <- emu/mos6502/mos6502-common.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/mos6502/mos6502.o <- emu/mos6502/mos6502-skeleton.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/nes/io_reg.o <- emu/nes/io_reg.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/nes/nrom.o <- emu/nes/nrom.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/nes/sxrom.o <- emu/nes/sxrom.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/nes/mmc1.o <- emu/nes/mmc1.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/nes/ppu.o <- emu/nes/ppu.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/main.o <- emu/main.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/shell.o <- emu/shell.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/ines.o <- emu/ines.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/rc.o <- emu/rc.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/timekeeper.o <- emu/timekeeper.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/memory.o <- emu/memory.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/membus.o <- emu/membus.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/reset_manager.o <- emu/reset_manager.c
build/emu/gcc/debug/fileio.o <- emu/fileio.c
Linking bin/hawknest-gcc-debug...
```

You should now have a binary called `hawknest-gcc-debug` in a newly-created `bin/`
directory. If you run it without any arguments (or with the `-h` flag), you will
get a help message like so:

```
bin/hawknest-gcc-debug
Usage: bin/hawknest-gcc-debug [options] <rom-path>
Options:
  --palette or -p <path> : Use the NES palette at <path>
  --cscheme or -c <path> : Use the NES controller scheme at <path>
  --scale   or -s <int>  : Scale NES output by <int>
  --help    or -h        : Print this message
  --version or -V        : Print version information
```

Probably the only option here you'll ever have to worry about is the `--scale`
argument, which scales the size of the GUI window for the NES emulator by an
integer factor.

### Building ROMs (test code)
I've supplied you with some simple test programs in the `test/` directory in the
main source tree: `hello.c` and `primes.c`. `hello.c` tests writing a "Hello World"
message to stdout using the paravirtual interface, while `primes.c` goes a step
further to implement an interactive prime-number-checker. These will not work
out of the box, and you probably don't want to focus your effort there. Rather,
you'll want to look at the unit tests (`test/*.s`) which test small instruction
sequences for the 6502 and do not rely on libc to have initialized. The nice
part about these tests is that the first instruction you see in the `.s` file is
actually the first instruction to run on the machine (this is not true for the
`.c` files). You can compile all of these tests to Hawknest ROMs by making the
tests target in the project root:

```
make tests
build/test/hello.s <- test/hello.c
build/test/hello.o <- build/test/hello.s
build/lib/intr.s <- lib/intr.c
build/lib/intr.o <- build/lib/intr.s
build/lib/crt0.o <- lib/crt0.s
build/lib/ctype.o <- lib/ctype.s
build/lib/exehdr.o <- lib/exehdr.s
build/lib/mainargs.o <- lib/mainargs.s
build/lib/paravirt.o <- lib/paravirt.s
Linking bin/hawknest.lib...
Linking bin/hello
build/test/primes.s <- test/primes.c
build/test/primes.o <- build/test/primes.s
Linking bin/primes
build/test/00_lda0.o <- test/00_lda0.s
Linking bin/00_lda0
build/test/01_lda1.o <- test/01_lda1.s
Linking bin/01_lda1
build/test/02_lda2.o <- test/02_lda2.s
Linking bin/02_lda2
build/test/03_sta0.o <- test/03_sta0.s
Linking bin/03_sta0
...
```

You'll also find a `modules.mk` file in the `test/` directory, which informs the
`Makefile` of the test files to compile. If you want to write your own test, just
put the source file in `test/` and add it to the `modules.mk` file; both C (`.c`) and
6502 assembly (`.s`) files will work, but `.s` files will not be linked with the
`cc65` C runtime system. Behind the scenes, the Makefile invokes `cc65`, `ca65`, and
`ld65`, just as in your preliminary project, but using a custom library
(`bin/hawknest.lib`, built from the sources in `lib/`) and a custom linker script
(`cfg/hawknest.cfg`).


### Running Hawknest
Once you have your compiled ROM files, you can run them in Hawknest. For
example, we could run the ROM file for the `hello.c` test like this:

```
bin/hawknest-gcc-debug bin/hello
```

Notice that nothing happens: this is because there's no CPU to run the program!
You will implement this, and when you do, you'll start to see some output here.
You can also start Hawknest in an interactive shell, which is useful for
debugging purposes:

```
bin/hawknest-gcc-debug -i bin/hello
$(hawknest-shell)>
```

Here you can type commands into the interactive shell, but aside from the
memory `peek`, `poke`, and `dump` commands, they won't do anything. The memory
commands will work just fine since I've already implemented the memory
controller, RAM, and ROM subsystems for you. Note that you can also enter the
shell for a running ROM, even if you didn't pass the `-i` argument to the
Hawknest executable: just send a SIGINT (mapped to `Ctrl-C` in most terminal
emulators) to Hawknest to pause the CPU and open the shell. This also applies
for stopping continue or step commands early.

While working on your project, you may want to have debugging prints that only
appear when you are debugging your CPU. I've provided a macro for you to
achieve this. The macro is called `DEBUG_PRINT`. It works similarly to `printf`,
but automatically appends a `\n` to each printout, and includes the filename and
line number of the printout itself. Additionally, it will only produce output
when the code is compiled for debugging (which is the default). See the
[appendix](#appendix-1-configuring-the-build-process) section for additional Hawknest compilation options.

### Testing Hawknest
I've tried to make things a bit easier on you by providing unit tests for
a fairly large subset (but not all) of the ISA. These tests are by no means
exhaustive, but they can at least help to guide your development. To run
a test, simply use the binary in the `bin/` directory, for example:

```
make tests
bin/hawknest-gcc-debug bin/00_lda0
```

will test the `lda` instruction using your emulator implementation. Essentially
what all of these unit tests do is execute a few instructions and dump the
state of the machine afterwards (using a special instruction). Note that you'll
want to have the initial guts of your emulator in place before this will even
work (instruction fetch, decode, execute etc.) because the state dumping relies
on the ability of instructions to execute.

I've also provided a testing framework for you which will run all of the tests automatically. To use it, run:

```
make run-unit-tests
```

If you haven't implemented anything yet and you run this, it will hang for
a bit and you'll see it time out, producing a failed test. When you get more
working, you'll see more useful output: your machine's state dump is compared
to the state dump of our reference code. If it doesn't match, the test fails,
and the framework will print a diff showing where the machine states differ.

### Working with Instrumentation

By default, Hawknest is compiled with embedded runtime instrumentation, namely
`UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer` and `AddressSanitizer`. The former detects and reports
many instances of undefined behavior, and is always non-fatal. This is to say,
`UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer` will never halt a program because it detects an
instance of undefined behavior.

`AddressSanitizer`, on the other hand, is always fatal when it detects errors
(mostly invalid memory access). Its checks are useful, but if it becomes
a nuisance, you can disable it at build-time like this:

```
make NO_ASAN=1
```

On Linux, `AddressSanitizer` also performs a memory-leak check at program
termination. This can be a bit noisy and annoying, as it includes leaks from
within external libraries (e.g., SDL), and often fails to track down the origin
of a given leak. Unfortunately, there's no way to disable this at build-time
without disabling all of `AddressSanitizer`, but it can be disabled at execution
time by setting the `ASAN_OPTIONS` environment variable appropriately; in
bash-compatible shells that looks like this:

```
ASAN_OPTIONS=detect_leaks=0 bin/hawknest-gcc-debug <rom_path>
```

This instrumentation is enabled for the *entire* Hawknest platform, not just the part
you're working on, so if you see an error report in code you didn’t write, let
me know!

## Part 3: Implementation

This section will outline some strategies for designing your 6502v with readable code.

### Strategy
The skeleton has been set up such that only `emu/mos6502/mos6502-skeleton.c`
should need to be modified to build the CPU. There's much more detailed
information in that file, but the gist is that you'll need to fill in
`mos6502_step(...)` such that it steps the CPU forward by one instruction. A few
helper routines for reading and writing memory are already provided, along with
some coarse cycle counting. While you could write the entire CPU implementation
inside `mos6502_step`, we recommended that you add additional functions
liberally.

If you're the kind of person that likes to split things into multiple files,
the `Makefile` is built to accommodate that. If you place an additional source
file in `emu/mos6502/` and add it to `emu/mos6502/modules.mk`, it'll automatically
be compiled and linked into Hawknest when you run `make`. Adding a header file to
`emu/include/mos6502/` requires no extra steps; anything in `emu/include/` is
immediately available for inclusion by source files. The `Makefile` also
understands source and header dependencies, so you don't need to `make clean`
when you edit a header file; just run `make` like usual.

### Suggested Tools
When navigating and working with a large codebase, there are several tools you
might want to get familiar with. The first is `ctags`. This is a utility which
creates an index of all the functions and symbols in your source tree, which
you can then use to navigate easily within a text editor like `vi`.

For example, to use `ctags` for this project, in the Hawknest directory, run the
following (you may have to install the `ctags` package):

```
ctags -R
```

This will create a `tags` file in this directory. To use this in `vi` or `vim`, add
the following line to your `.vimrc` file in your home directory:

```
tags=tags;/
```

Now, within `vi` or `vim`, if you hover over a symbol that you want to see the
definition of, e.g. a function, you can navigate to it simply by pressing `ctrl
+ ]`. You can go back to where you were before by typing `ctrl + t`. Emacs has
similar capabilities.

Other tools that might be useful:
- `gdb` / `lldb` : both interactive debuggers for compiled C/C++ programs
- `grep` / `ack` / `the_silver_searcher` / `ripgrep` : all tools that search for text strings in a source tree (roughly in order from slowest to fastest). You can also use plugins like [Ctrl-p](https://github.com/kien/ctrlp.vim) for your editor to do interactive searching/fuzzy finding
- `tmux` : useful for having multiple terminal windows open at once
- `tig` : command-line graphical interface for git repos (see also [lazygit](https://github.com/jesseduffield/lazygit))

## Updates
As we progress on this project, I may be making updates to the sections of code
that you are not working on (e.g. graphics code, interrupt handling, libraries
etc.). If I do make updates, I will ask you to get them from the repo using:

```
git pull
```
Because of this, I would advise against adding code to parts of the system
outside of `emu/mos6502/mos6502.c` (and your support files) unless absolutely necessary.

## Handin
Once you're convinced that your 6502 implementation is complete, you will hand
in your code using an automated hand-in utility. Simply run:

```
make handin
```

to start the process. The handin script will ask you for your information and
will use it to submit to my handin server. Note that you can continue to submit
until the deadline.

## Equal Contribution
Since you're working in groups, I expect that I'll see equal contribution among
group members when I look at your code. Make liberal use of `git` commits to make this clear
For example, I would commit with:

```
...add stuff to git index using git add...
git commit --author="Kyle Hale <khale@cs.iit.edu>"
```
to take ownership of a commit.

Make sure to include a descriptive line such as `"Added implementation of JMP instruction."`

##  <a href="build-config"></a>Appendix 1: Configuring the Build Process

By default, invoking make compiles Hawknest using GCC in a "debug"
configuration, but this is not the only way Hawknest can be built. Hawknest can
be compiled using either Clang or GCC (with custom executables for either), and
has three available compilation "modes": `DEBUG`, `OPT`, and `RELEASE`. These are set
using the `COMPILER` and `MODE` variables, so to compile with Clang in `OPT` mode:

```
make COMPILER=CLANG MODE=OPT
```

The build artifacts and final binaries are stored separately for each mode, so
they will never conflict. That said, only one `COMPILER` and `MODE` can be used for
a given `make` invocation. The name of the final binary reflects these
compilation options, so the above invocation would produce
`bin/hawknest-clang-opt`.

### Modes
The compilation mode has the most pronounced effect on the behavior and performance of the final executable.
- `DEBUG` mode is optimized for debugging. It's the only mode under which the
  `DEBUG_PRINT` macro is enabled, and it compiles Hawknest with a couple pieces
  of runtime instrumentation (`ubsan` and `asan`), which serve to catch common
  cases of undefined behavior or out-of-bounds memory accesses. `DEBUG` mode also
  enables a number of internal sanity checks within the skeleton, so if you
  manage to trip something outside of `mos6502.c`, let me know! Finally, `DEBUG`
  mode avoids compiler optimizations that would interfere with the use of an
  interactive debugger like `gdb` (namely inlining).
- `OPT` keeps all the runtime instrumentation and sanity checks of `DEBUG` mode,
  but disables `DEBUG_PRINT` and enables almost all compiler optimizations. This
  makes it substantially less useful if you like an interactive debugger, but
  it also often runs substantially faster.
- `RELEASE` mode takes the brakes off completely, dropping all runtime
  instrumentation and enabling link-time optimization. It's pretty useless for
  debugging, but it may be required to run NES games at full speed if you have
  a slower machine.

### Compilers
The difference between compilers is not particularly pronounced outside of the
diagnostics they produce, but if you prefer using Clang over GCC, you can
specify the `COMPILER` variable:

```
make COMPILER=CLANG
```

It also may be the case that your compiler is not available with the usual
name; you can override the command invoked for a particular compiler by
specifying the corresponding `EXEC` variable, e.g.

```
make GCC_EXEC=gcc-8
```

This works for specifying the CC65 toolchain executables as well, so if they're not in your `PATH`, you can specify them manually:

```
make CC65_EXEC=path/to/cc65 AR65_EXEC=path/to/ar65 CA65_EXEC=path/to/ca65 LD65_EXEC=path/to/ld65
```

If all the CC65 executables are in the same directory, the above can be shortened to:

```
make CC65_PREFIX=path/to/cc65/prefix/dir
```

## Appendix 2: Other Potentially-Useful Macros
Internally, Hawknest uses `ASSERT` and `UNREACHABLE` macros for sanity checks, and
these are exposed to you as well through `base.h`. While you're certainly not
required to use them, you may find them useful nonetheless.

The `ASSERT` macro is very similar to the assert macro in the C standard library.
It's used as a function that accepts a single boolean value, e.g.:

```
ASSERT(x < 7)
```

If that expression evaluates to a logical `false`, a message documenting the
exact failure is printed to `stderr`, but execution otherwise continues. This is
to say, `ASSERT` is never fatal.

The `UNREACHABLE` macro is used to mark points in code that should not be
possible to reach during execution (typically default labels in exhaustive
switch statements), and is also used like a function (e.g. `UNREACHABLE()`),
despite taking no arguments. When an `UNREACHABLE()` statement is executed, it
has very similar behavior to an assertion failure; it's also non-fatal.

Both `UNREACHABLE` and `ASSERT` are disabled when compiling in `RELEASE` mode, but
otherwise stay active in `DEBUG` and `OPT` mode.
